# straln: Stretcher Alignment & Alternative Mutation Finder

`straln` is a bioinformatics tool designed to parse `.aln` files in `markx0` format generated by 
the **EMBOSS stretcher** tool. 
It converts pairwise alignments into genomic formats (BEDPE/BED) 
and can optionally intersect these results with VCF files to identify 
alternative genomic variations nearby.

## Features
* **Automated Parsing:** Converts EMBOSS stretcher `.aln` format to `BEDPE` and two separate `BED`.
* **Coordinate Mapping:** Automatically extracts starting offsets from alignment headers or allows manual overrides.
* **Mutation Analysis:** Compares alignment gaps/mismatches with a VCF file to find alternative mutations within a specified window.
* **Refined Output:** Joins consecutive alignment blocks for cleaner downstream analysis.

## Installation

Since the project uses `setuptools`, you can install it in editable mode:

```bash
# From the root of the project (where setup.py is located)
pip install -e .
```

```bash
# Getting Help
straln --help
# only parse the alignment
straln my_alignment.aln -o ./output_folder
# parse alignment and find alternative mutations from a VCF (when using -vcf parameter -c is mandatory)
straln my_alignment.aln -vcf variations.vcf -c 17 -d 150 -o ./output_folder
```

### Output files
The tool generates the following files in the specified output folder:

* **`parsed.bedpe`**: Raw alignment blocks in BEDPE format.
* **`parsed.joined.bedpe`**: Merged consecutive alignment blocks for easier visualization of londer indels.
* **`seq1.bed` / `seq2.bed`**: Separate tracks for each sequence.
* **`stats.txt`**: A summary file containing the alignment length, number of mismatches, and total gaps.
* **`alternative_mutations.csv`**: *(Generated only when using the `-vcf` flag)* A list of variants from your VCF file that were found near alignment discrepancies.